Legislative Television and Broadcasting Services
Legislative Television Broadcast and Recording Services records and broadcasts proceedings of the Nova Scotia House of Assembly.
Video and audio of proceedings in the legislative chamber, of legislative committees and commissions, and of special events or ceremonies are available here and on our Broadcast Archive page.
Use of video and audio
There are restrictions on video use except for specific purposes - full guidelines for use appear below.
Written permission by the Speaker is required for all other usage. If you wish to obtain a recording, contact Legislative Television and Broadcasting Services.
Watch live
Live proceedings are rebroadcast later in the day depending on the hours of proceedings. When the House sits late into the evening there is no rebroadcast.
Proceedings are also broadcast live on:
Bell Cable Channel 230 in HD
Eastlink Cable channel 95
Eastlink Cable channel 636 in HD
YouTube
Recent broadcasts
House of Assembly
Transcripts of proceedings in the House of Assembly are available here.
Legislative Committees
- Standing Committee on Community Services
- Standing Committee on Health
- Standing Committee on Human Resources
- Standing Committee on Law Amendments
- Standing Committee on Natural Resources and Economic Development
- Standing Committee on Public Accounts
- Standing Committee on Private and Local Bills
- Standing Committee on Veterans Affairs
Transcripts of Public Accounts and other Committee meetings are available here.
Committees of the Whole House
Select Committees
Broadcast archive
Choose from our archive of audio and video for past proceedings of the House, committees, special events and ceremonies.
Contact
For more information visit Legislative Television and Broadcasting Services.
Phone: 902-424-6420
Email: LTV@novascotia.ca
Guidelines for Use
The Speaker of the Nova Scotia House of Assembly grants permission to record and use the audio and video of the proceedings of the Assembly and its committees for educational and research purposes and as provided below.
The video may only be used with its original audio component and no other audio or video material may be added to audio or video material used.
Television and radio broadcasters may use recorded excerpts of the proceedings in their news or public affairs programs in balanced, fair and accurate reports of proceedings.
Neither the audio nor the video may be used for political party advertising, election campaigns or any other politically partisan activity except that members of the House of Assembly may, for the purpose of serving their constituents, make use of recorded excerpts of the proceedings on their websites or on social media if not presented in a misleading manner and if a link is provided to the full proceeding.
Neither the audio nor the video may be used in any edited form that could mislead or misinform an audience or viewer or that does not present a balanced portrayal of the proceedings in the House.
The audio and video may not be used in court, or before a tribunal or other body, for the purpose of questioning, commenting upon or making judgement upon the proceedings in the House.
Any other use or rebroadcast or webcast of these proceedings requires the express written approval of the Speaker.