Glossary
A
Legislation made by the Legislature for Nunavut.
An Act that makes changes to an existing Act.
A regulation that makes changes to an existing regulation.
C
Means "chapter".
Means "comes into force".
A version of an Act or regulation that includes all changes made to the parent Act or regulation.
N
Means "not in force".
An official publication of the Territorial Printer of Nunavut, which is authorized by the Public Printing Act. Part I of the Gazette contains appointments and notices and Part II contains regulations and other statutory instruments.
P
An Act other than an amending Act.
A regulation other than an amending regulation.
R
The abbreviation for the Revised Regulations of the Northwest Territories, 1990. Each regulation included in the revision is assigned a chapter number.
The abbreviation for the Revised Statutes of the Northwest Territories, 1988. Each statute included in the revision is assigned a chapter number.
Legislation made by a body other than the Legislature under powers set out in an Act.
The most recent revision of the regulations of the Northwest Territories. A revision has not yet been done for Nunavut's regulations.
The most recent revision of the Acts of the Northwest Territories. A revision has not yet been done for Nunavut's Acts.
A revision consolidates all Acts or regulations, and makes certain changes to them (such as renumbering provisions, updating the language used, correcting obvious errors).
S
Means "section" or "sections", "subsection" or "subsections", "paragraph" or "paragraphs".
The abbreviation for the Statutes of the Northwest Territories. The Statutes of the Northwest Territories are sorted according to the year in which they are made, and assigned a chapter number.
The abbreviation for the Statutes of Nunavut. The Statutes of Nunavut are sorted according to the year in which they are made, and assigned a chapter number.
Means "schedule".
An Act as it read at the time the Commissioner of Nunavut assented to it or a regulation as it read at the time it was registered under the Statutory Instruments Act.
Legislation made by the Legislature for Nunavut.
An instrument described in subsection 1(1) of the Statutory Instruments Act.