Tow Inquires
General Parking Enforcement Tows
- Parking Ban Tows
- Cliffs Towing - 780-451-1555
- Oil Country Towing - 780-433-1242
Impound Lot - Police Seized Vehicle Section
Phone: 780-496-8668
Address: 12230 124 Avenue NW
Main page content begins here
Parking Enforcement Services manages parking violations for accessible, on-street, private property, school zones and private agency parking.
There are many rules surrounding parking in the City to ensure safety for everyone is maintained. This includes on-street, accessible, private agency, school zones, private property and seasonal parking. Learn what you can do about illegal and abandoned parking or what you need to do if you’ve been ticketed or towed.
Due to the wide range of patrolled areas, the parking enforcement program is contracted out. Currently, the Paladin Security Group holds the contract.
Phone: 780-496-8668
Address: 12230 124 Avenue NW
The appeal process varies depending on the circumstances of the case, so contact the Bylaw Services office by dialing 311 for information on the appeal process. You may also wait until you receive a violation ticket with court appearance instructions, which will tell you exactly what to do.
The best place for vehicles to park is in garages, driveways and parking lots. It ensures first responders have enough space to get through and road maintenance crews can keep our roads safe all year round.
City-owned streets are a shared resource that everyone has access to but are not intended for long-term parking. A vehicle can park for up to 72 consecutive hours as long as it doesn’t have parking restrictions identified, such as a sign. A vehicle parked more than 72 consecutive hours on public property or a city street is considered abandoned.
People who have parking placards are unable to walk unassisted for more than 50 metres. These individuals need larger stalls to load and unload devices such as walkers and wheelchairs and unobstructed access to curb cuts.
If your vehicle is parked illegally in a designated accessible parking stall, you will be issued a $250 ticket and may face towing and impound charges.
No part of the vehicle may occupy any part of the stall designated for drivers with a Service Alberta Parking Placard for People with Disabilities. The City of Edmonton has a zero-tolerance policy for vehicles illegally parked in designated accessible parking stalls.
Parking enforcement officers can only write tickets where signs are posted correctly and are consistent with the City's standard for parking signs.
Parking lot signs must be:
The City of Edmonton Parking Enforcement Services will NOT ticket and tow vehicles that are parked in areas where signs:
Because fines do change periodically, it is best not to put any fine amount on your parking signs.
It’s a free volunteer program, authorizing agencies to issue City parking tickets to vehicles parked illegally on private property. The program consists of shopping centres, Property Management companies, hospitals and private condominiums.
A private parking agency requires a Parking Administrator and one Agency Parking Enforcement Officer per site.
Parking Administrator: A Parking Administrator is a person from the agency who acts as a liaison to the City and ensures that officers properly fill out parking tickets. The Administrator cannot issue parking tickets.
Agency Parking Enforcement Officer: An Agency Parking Enforcement Officer writes parking tickets to vehicles parked in violation of the Traffic Bylaw 5590. The officer is only authorized to write tickets on the agency's property where there are parking signs. Agencies may have more than one enforcement officer. The agency is required to gain security clearances for their parking staff from the Edmonton Police Service. Call 780-423-4567 for information about security clearances.
Provide two volunteers and complete the Application Package.
The volunteers can be trained and ready to go within three months.
Owners must provide proof of ownership as confirmed by a Land Titles Certificate. If you are not the owner of the land (as confirmed by a Land Titles certificate), please provide the following:
OR
Parking Enforcement Services has the right to request additional proof of ownership or documentation showing permission to enforce Parking Restriction on Private Property.
Administrators submit these documents:
Enforcement Officers submit these documents:
All applications must be mailed as originals. No photocopies will be accepted.
Schools can cause a lot of extra traffic in residential areas, which is why the City focuses extra attention on parking around grade schools and post-secondary institutions.
Illegal parking around grade schools causes congestion and visual obstructions that make it hard for other drivers to see pedestrians, especially children, crossing the street. Illegal parking around post-secondary institutions can be a safety hazard or an unreasonable disruption to the residents living in the area.
To help prevent problems around schools, the Edmonton Police Service and Parking Enforcement Officers work together to ensure students, parents and staff members of local schools know where to park safely and legally.
Parking or dropping off children in front of grade schools is not allowed at most schools in Edmonton.
This no parking/no stopping zone ensures that drivers passing the school can clearly see anyone crossing the street.
If you are dropping your children off for school, please park legally down the street and walk them to the door.
Students attending post-secondary institutions are encouraged to walk, bike or take transit to their school.
If you do drive, you should park in your college or university's parking lot. If you choose to park on the street, be sure that you obey all signs as many neighbourhoods have parking restrictions that only allow people who live in the area to park there.
Parking in a no parking zone, bus zone or emergency lane is never okay and your vehicle will be ticketed and towed.
Parking Enforcement Officers work with the Edmonton Police Service on several programs to prevent illegal parking around schools:
At the beginning of every school year, the City uses the media and advertising to remind drivers about the no parking and no stopping zones around schools.
Parking Enforcement Officers have the authority as per the Traffic Bylaw 5590 to conduct patrols and issue traffic tags related to parking infractions.
The Beat Officers patrol areas in the downtown and old Strathcona districts. These beats are designated patrol routes which the Officer enforces the Traffic Bylaw 5590.
The City Officers respond to specific parking complaints obtained by 311. Regular patrols are also conducted when not responding to dispatched calls.
Officers respond to specific event assignments such as festivals, concerts, football games and hockey games. Parking restrictions will be in effect during major Commonwealth Stadium events.
The City's parking bylaws are in place for a reason and they play a major role in making Edmonton a great place to live.
By repeatedly parking illegally, you monopolize public space that should belong to everyone and – if you park in an emergency lane, wheelchair accessible stall, or too close to an intersection – you can even put other people in danger.
That is why the City has a "three strike" rule. If you have received two tickets for the same violation in the same area, your vehicle will automatically be towed if there is a third violation.
If you drive an out-of-province vehicle, warnings count towards your third strike.
If you get a parking ticket, there are three ways to pay:
Submit your bylaw ticket payment online 24/7.
City of Edmonton
PO Box 2024
Edmonton, Alberta
T5J 4M6
By credit card (Visa, MasterCard, American Express), debit or cash at:
2nd Floor, Edmonton Tower
10111 104 Avenue NW
8am-4:30pm
Monday-Friday
Voluntary payment of a parking ticket must be made on the specified due date. A final notice is mailed to the vehicle owner if payment is not received beforehand.
If a ticket is still unpaid, a violation ticket is issued to the vehicle owner informing that a scheduled court appearance is required. Failing to appear may result in a conviction in absence. Additional penalties and/or denial of motor vehicle services may be put into effect until all fines and penalties are paid.
Bylaw Ticket Administration
Phone: 780-496-5161
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday, 8:30am- 4:30pm
Citizens can now report parking complaints directly to 311 using the Edmonton 311 App, or by calling 311.
No, unless the vehicle is abandoned or there are parking restrictions identified by a traffic control device, such as a sign. While you own your home, the streets are a shared resource for all Edmontonians. That means everyone has a right to park on City-owned streets, even if the street is located in front of your house.
A vehicle is considered abandoned when parked on public property or a city street for longer than 72 consecutive hours. While this includes vehicles that are inoperable or have invalid licence plates, it also includes registered vehicles that are left unattended, as enforcement officers cannot enter one to confirm the vehicle’s registration. We ask citizens to park their vehicle(s) on their private driveways or find another suitable parking area if they intend to park longer than 72 hours (for example, if one is planning a trip out of town). City streets are not intended for long-term parking.
The abandoned vehicle bylaw is intended to remove inoperable derelict vehicles. It is not to be used to settle neighbour disputes, therefore we reserve the right to not attend abandoned vehicle complaints if we determine that a resident is misusing the complaint for ulterior motives. Please report only if you believe the vehicle is truly abandoned. If you are unsure, please contact 311 and they will help you determine if an identified vehicle can be considered abandoned.
If someone reports a vehicle as abandoned to City of Edmonton parking enforcement officers, a 72 hour warning notice is issued to the vehicle to notify the owner about the complaint. During this time, an officer monitors the vehicle to confirm whether or not it is abandoned.
If the vehicle was driven or used within the 72 hour notice, no further action is taken. If it is determined that the vehicle has not moved, a parking citation is issued and the vehicle is towed. This would cost the driver a $50 fine for an abandoned vehicle, towing charges of $120 plus additional storage fees.
Contact the Edmonton Police Services, Police Seized Vehicles Lot at 780-496-8668.
Please contact 311 and include all details that apply (time, date, tag number, issuer number, concern, summary of the situation).
To pay a ticket online, have the ticket number and your credit card information ready. Only VISA, MasterCard and American Express are accepted.
On Street Parking Complaints
Officer Commendations and Concerns
Policy or Procedure Inquiries
| Phone | In Edmonton: 311 Outside Edmonton: 780-442-5311 |
|---|
| TTY | 780-944-5555 |
|---|---|
| Link | https://311.edmonton.ca/reports/list_services |
2nd Floor, Edmonton Tower
10111 104 Avenue NW
Monday-Friday
| Phone | 311 |
|---|
| Phone | 780-496-5174 |
|---|