City Plan (48.2MB)
What choices do we need to make to be a healthy, urban and climate resilient city of two million people that supports a prosperous region?
Main page content begins here
The City Plan is about our spaces and places and how we move around the city. It is about our community and what we need to do together to grow, adapt and succeed.
Edmonton’s City Plan, Charter Bylaw 20,000, was approved by City Council on December 7, 2020, and charts out how we will get to a future city, a city that has the benefits we enjoy today with new opportunities for the future.
The City Plan combines a Municipal Development Plan and Transportation Master Plan, and includes strategic direction in environmental planning, social planning and economic development.
It comprehensively replaces The Ways documents by setting strategic direction for the way Edmonton grows, its mobility systems, open spaces, employment and social networks, generally touching on most aspects of life in Edmonton.
What choices do we need to make to be a healthy, urban and climate resilient city of two million people that supports a prosperous region?
View all Maps associated with The City Plan.
Sort City Plan Policies using the City Plan Policy Dashboard.
The City Plan must reflect both Edmontonians’ desired future state and their experience of places and spaces within their community everyday.
The City Plan has 6 Guiding Values that articulate how Edmontonians want to experience their future city.
At the intersection of The City Plan's 6 Guiding Values and the 4 goals of ConnectEdmonton are 24 City Building Outcomes, revealing what Edmontonians ultimately want to experience in the city. The City Building Outcomes provide the first step towards developing The City Plan policy.
The 5 Big City Moves are an invitation for Edmontonians to work together to build our future city. They define priorities to create opportunities for Edmonton by advancing City Council’s Strategic vision, principles and goals through The City Plan.
Is about building connections to welcome new residents and developing housing, recreation and employment centres that are within reach. Distinct geographic districts comprised of many neighbourhoods and sub-areas within the city are supported by local community hubs and social gathering places.
They are linked by a range of efficient mobility options and walkable features. Diverse design and development opportunities are provided to meet the needs of residents through all life’s phases. Accessibility is improved so residents can turn their time and attention to the things that really matter, like neighbourliness.
Is about working with what we have today and continuously adapting and re-imagining our built environment to meet the needs of the future. The city is constantly evolving, intensifying and becoming more efficient in response to new demands, opportunities and design ideas.
Reshaping the city to better serve another million residents will require that we preserve our heritage assets while deliberately making more room to grow. In a rebuildable city residents respect the past but also understand the need to adjust, to be creative and to be open to new possibilities that make our community thrive.
Is about creating a city that is dedicated to preserving and protecting the environment through good design and conscious development decisions.
By reclaiming underused sites, adopting regenerative design practices, becoming more energy efficient and enhancing urban biodiversity, Edmonton’s physical growth and population expansion are not detrimental but instead act as a catalyst to sustainability and resilience. By designing for people, a greener city is a place where everyone has access to natural spaces and can enjoy the benefits of living a healthier and better connected outdoor life.
Is city-making that supports human-centred design where people of all ages, backgrounds and abilities can not only survive, but thrive. It’s where the Indigenous roots of our region are celebrated and made concrete in our daily lives, and where newcomers feel welcome and at home.
By focusing on building a city that emphasizes compassion and inclusivity, the City of Edmonton and Edmonton residents alike are intentional in their efforts to reduce poverty, provide attainable and affordable housing and eliminate homelessness.
Is about developing new physical and economic opportunities for ideas, talent and investment to come together. It’s where innovation, creativity, and technology go hand-in-hand with purpose and energy, and where partnerships are ignited to steward our future economy and support personal prosperity.
By creating a collaborative environment where businesses, academic institutions, the arts, and technology spark synergies and drive competitiveness ahead, Edmonton is attractive by design.