Civil Special Chambers (1/2 day) - Calgary and Edmonton
The scheduling of these applications will be reserved for parties who are unable to use the electronic with notice desk processes (i.e. due to lack of consent by Counsel, for example) as announced by the Court here:
Civil Justice Chambers With Notice Desk Applications
Note: Before checking availability, please be certain to refresh your internet browser.
Half Day Civil Special Availability - Calgary
Half Day Civil Special Availability - Edmonton
Parties are required to select a mutually available and alternate date, and complete the Special Chambers Booking Form in accordance with the procedures outlined in the form.
The Court Coordinator will provide parties with a Confirmation of their scheduled Special Application via email.
Special Family Chambers - Calgary and Edmonton
The scheduling of these applications will be reserved for parties who are unable to use the electronic desk processes (i.e. due to lack of consent by Counsel, for example) as announced by the Court here:
Family Applications with Written Argument
Parties are required to seek a date by attending Family Docket in accordance with the procedures here.
Regional Special Chambers - Red Deer, Lethbridge and Circuit Point Locations
The scheduling of these applications will be reserved for parties who are unable to use the electronic desk processes (i.e. due to lack of consent by Counsel, for example) as announced by the Court here:
Family Applications with Written Argument
Civil Justice Chambers with Notice Desk Applications
Parties are required to complete the Special Chambers Booking Form in accordance with the procedures. The local Court Coordinator will contact the parties with available dates.
The Court Coordinator will provide parties with a Confirmation of their scheduled Special Application via email.
BOOKING PROCEDURES, MATERIALS AND FILING DEADLINES
CIVIL & MASTERS SPECIALS PROVINCE WIDE
Materials
The following materials are required on notice to the party(ies) opposite:
Applicant:
1. Application or Originating Application;
2. any material in support of the Application, including an Affidavit and other evidence pursuant to Rule 6.11 of the Alberta Rules of Court;
3. a copy of the originating pleadings (i.e. Statement of Claim or Originating Application) and any other pleadings being relied upon;
4. brief and authorities;
5. proposed Form of Order;
Respondent:
1. Responding Affidavit and other evidence pursuant to Rule 6.11 of the Alberta Rules of Court;
2. a copy of the responding pleadings (i.e. Statement of Defence) and any other pleadings being relied upon;
3. brief and authorities;
4. proposed Form of Order.
Parties must include any information they intend to rely on as the Justice or Master hearing the Application will not have ready access to any other materials (even if previously filed).
The materials must be submitted in accordance with the procedures outlined here. The subject line must indicate the action number, a brief style of cause and the date of the hearing.
Filing Deadlines
The filing deadlines are:
-
Applicant's materials - 2 weeks following the “triggering” date;
-
Respondent's materials - 4 weeks following the “triggering” date.
-
The “triggering date” for deadlines will be the date the scheduling confirmation is sent to parties.
-
Alternate deadlines may be set by the Court, including deadlines proposed by parties through a Consent Order submitted in accordance with the procedures outlined here.
FAMILY SPECIALS
In Edmonton and Calgary, the Applicant should advise the Justice presiding in Family Docket Court of their booking priority so that this can be considered in the Family Docket Court triage process.
Materials and Filing Deadlines
The materials and filing deadlines included in Family Practice Note 2 continue to apply to newly scheduled Family Specials. Parties must also include any other information they intend to rely on as the Justice hearing the Application will not have ready access to any other materials (even if previously filed). Alternate deadlines may be set by the Court, including deadlines proposed by parties through a Consent Order submitted in accordance with the procedures outlined here. A Justice presiding in Family Docket Court may also set alternate deadlines.