Divorce Forms and Instructions
The following forms and instructions are to complete an uncontested divorce – that is one where custody, access (parenting) and support have been settled. The forms do not deal with property division.
All desk divorce packages submitted to the Court must include a Desk Divorce Package Checklist and copies of all relevant, previously filed materials as listed on the Checklist.
Effective January 30, 2025, the Desk Divorce Package Clerk Review Checklist is now available to assist with your filing submission.
Note: Effective September 1, 2018, the Court of King's Bench will not longer accept Divorce Judgments in handwritten form in the Judicial Districts of Calgary, Edmonton, Lethbridge and Red Deer. Divorce Forms and instructions, including Divorce Judgments in fillable PDF form, are available below.
Assistance with Preparing Court Forms
Court forms information coordinators are available to assist with locating court forms and providing information on when to use them and how to fill them out.
Further information on this service and locations can be found on the Court and Justice Services (CJS) website.
If you are representing yourself, please attend a Court and Justice Services office to have your Statement of Claim for Divorce with Children (and all copies) reviewed by Court and Justice Services for accuracy. Once Court and Justice Services confirms your application is satisfactory, you may file your application with Court and Justice Services using Interac, Visa or Mastercard. If you need to file using cash payment, you may attend thereafter at the Court of King's Bench.
Note: If you are having trouble opening PDF forms (i.e. getting messages about updating Adobe Reader):
- Choose "Always Open in System Viewer" after download
- Or try right-clicking on the link or download button and choosing "Save Link As..." and then opening the file from your computer
- Or try clicking the pdf icon in the address bar and selecting open in Adobe Viewer or see more information here
Request for Certificate of Divorce
You can request a copy of your certificate of divorce by completing this online form.
Other Forms
Other forms relating to divorce actions may be found on the Family Law forms page.