Working at the House of Commons
As one of Canada’s Top 100 Employers, the House of Commons is committed to helping you realize your full potential. We offer many opportunities to develop and advance your career, try something new in a different field, or change your career path. We provide training and learning opportunities to improve your professional skills and expertise.
Vision
We deliver outstanding services to Members of Parliament and their employees in support of parliamentary democracy.
Mission
We support the parliamentary work of Members by anticipating their needs and delivering streamlined, personalized, quality services.
Values
Our people
We believe that everyone has a contribution to make and has the potential for individual growth.
Teamwork
We are one team that leverages diversity in all its forms.
Excellence
We strive to continuously improve our services by experimenting and innovating.
Accountability
We honour our commitments, take responsibility for our actions and learn from them.
Impartiality
We are non-partisan and we respect, support and promote the democratic process.
Benefits
House of Commons Administration employees enjoy competitive compensation. Based on their employment status, they are entitled to a range of comprehensive benefits such as:
Health and dental care plans
Indeterminate and long-term employees receive group health, dental, disability and life insurance coverage.
Pension plan
Indeterminate and long-term employees participate in the Public Service Pension Plan.
Flexible work schedules
Indeterminate and long-term employees have access to a variety of work schedules subject to operational requirements.
Various types of leave
Employees can be entitled to four weeks of annual leave upon hiring and earn paid vacation credits based on their years of service as well as earn sick leave credits and other types of leave such as family leave, a personal day and a one-time one-week leave allotment.
Resources to promote well-being
Employees have access to our Employee and Family Assistance Program. They are encouraged to organize and participate in on-site fitness and wellness activities. They also have access to a modern fitness centre.
Learning and advancement
Learning and development are part of the activities at the House of Commons. We encourage our employees to improve their competencies and acquire new skills to realize their full potential.
We have a fair and transparent competition process.