The House of Commons provides timely, reliable and non-partisan information on a variety of social media
channels and platforms. Our social media content generally complements the more comprehensive information
available on this website.
Information about the work of House of Commons committees. Track activities for specific
committees using a hashtag and the four-letter committee acronym (e.g. #FINA for the Standing
Committee on Finance) or click on the committee acronym in the list below.
Follow the parliamentary diplomacy work of Senators and Members of Parliament. Track activities
for specific parliamentary associations using a hashtag and the four-letter association acronym
(e.g. #CANA for the Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association) or click on the association acronym in
the list below.
Social Media
The House of Commons provides timely, reliable and non-partisan information on a variety of social media channels and platforms. Our social media content generally complements the more comprehensive information available on this website.
Follow the Speaker on X
@HoCSpeaker
The official X account of the Hon. Francis Scarpaleggia, Speaker of the House of Commons, with information about the activities of the Speaker, the work of the House of Commons and of Parliament.
Follow a Member of Parliament on X
See our list of Members of Parliament who are on X.
Follow the House of Commons on X
The House of Commons maintains several X accounts. Information may be shared between these accounts when appropriate.
@HoCChamber
Regular updates about proceedings in the House of Commons Chamber.
@HoCCommittees
Information about the work of House of Commons committees. Track activities for specific committees using a hashtag and the four-letter committee acronym (e.g. #FINA for the Standing Committee on Finance) or click on the committee acronym in the list below.
See all committee hashtags Hide all committee hashtags
Joint Committees
BILI Library of Parliament REGS Scrutiny of Regulations@OurCommons
General information about the work of the House of Commons, news and announcements to the media, arts and heritage, as well as the House of Commons Administration.
@ParlDiplomacy
Follow the parliamentary diplomacy work of Senators and Members of Parliament. Track activities for specific parliamentary associations using a hashtag and the four-letter association acronym (e.g. #CANA for the Canadian NATO Parliamentary Association) or click on the association acronym in the list below.
See all association hashtags Hide all association hashtags
Follow the Speaker on Instagram
Follow us on Instagram
Follow the Page Program on Instagram
Follow us on LinkedIn
Terms of Use
Our Social Media Terms of Use are available on the Important Notices page.
Information and Questions?
For information requests and questions for the House of Commons Administration, please visit our Contact Us page.
Please note that not all questions received via social media will be answered on that platform.
General enquiries can be addressed by email to info@parl.gc.ca.