Criminal Code (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-46)
Full Document:
- HTMLFull Document: Criminal Code (Accessibility Buttons available) |
- XMLFull Document: Criminal Code [5301 KB] |
- PDFFull Document: Criminal Code [7951 KB]
Act current to 2025-06-09 and last amended on 2025-04-08. Previous Versions
PART XVIILanguage of Accused (continued)
Marginal note:Language used in proceeding
530.2Â (1)Â If an order is granted directing that an accused be tried before a justice of the peace, provincial court judge, judge or judge and jury who speak both official languages, the justice or judge presiding over a preliminary inquiry or trial may, at the start of the proceeding, make an order setting out the circumstances in which, and the extent to which, the prosecutor and the justice or judge may use each official language.
Marginal note:Right of the accused
(2)Â Any order granted under this section shall, to the extent possible, respect the right of the accused to be tried in his or her official language.
- 2008, c. 18, s. 21
Marginal note:Change of venue
531Â Despite any other provision of this Act but subject to any regulations made under section 533, if an order made under section 530 cannot be conveniently complied with in the territorial division in which the offence would otherwise be tried, the court shall, except if that territorial division is in the Province of New Brunswick, order that the trial of the accused be held in another territorial division in the same province.
- R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 531
- R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 203
- 2008, c. 18, s. 21
Marginal note:Saving
532Â Nothing in this Part or the Official Languages Act derogates from or otherwise adversely affects any right afforded by a law of a province in force on the coming into force of this Part in that province or thereafter coming into force relating to the language of proceedings or testimony in criminal matters that is not inconsistent with this Part or that Act.
- 1977-78, c. 36, s. 1
Marginal note:Regulations
533Â The Lieutenant Governor in Council of a province may make regulations generally for carrying into effect the purposes and provisions of this Part in the province and the Commissioner of Yukon, the Commissioner of the Northwest Territories and the Commissioner of Nunavut may make regulations generally for carrying into effect the purposes and provisions of this Part in Yukon, the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, respectively.
- R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 533
- 1993, c. 28, s. 78
- 2002, c. 7, s. 144
Marginal note:Review
533.1Â (1)Â Within three years after this section comes into force, a comprehensive review of the provisions and operation of this Part shall be undertaken by any committee of the Senate, of the House of Commons or of both Houses of Parliament that may be designated or established by the Senate or the House of Commons, or by both Houses of Parliament, as the case may be, for that purpose.
Marginal note:Report
(2)Â The committee referred to in subsection (1) shall, within a year after a review is undertaken under that subsection or within any further time that may be authorized by the Senate, the House of Commons or both Houses of Parliament, as the case may be, submit a report on the review to Parliament, including a statement of any changes that the committee recommends.
- 2008, c. 18, s. 21.1
534Â [Repealed, 1997, c. 18, s. 63]
PART XVIIIProcedure on Preliminary Inquiry
Jurisdiction
Marginal note:Inquiry by justice
535Â If an accused who is charged with an indictable offence that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment is before a justice and a request has been made for a preliminary inquiry under subsection 536(4) or 536.1(3), the justice shall, in accordance with this Part, inquire into the charge and any other indictable offence, in respect of the same transaction, founded on the facts that are disclosed by the evidence taken in accordance with this Part.
- R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 535
- R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 96
- 2002, c. 13, s. 24
- 2019, c. 25, s. 238
Marginal note:Remand by justice to provincial court judge in certain cases
536Â (1)Â Where an accused is before a justice other than a provincial court judge charged with an offence over which a provincial court judge has absolute jurisdiction under section 553, the justice shall remand the accused to appear before a provincial court judge having jurisdiction in the territorial division in which the offence is alleged to have been committed.
Marginal note:Election before justice â 14 years or more of imprisonment
(2)Â If an accused is before a justice, charged with an indictable offence that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, other than an offence listed in section 469, the justice shall, after the information has been read to the accused, put the accused to an election in the following words:
You have the option to elect to be tried by a provincial court judge without a jury and without having had a preliminary inquiry; or you may elect to be tried by a judge without a jury; or you may elect to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. If you do not elect now, you are deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. If you elect to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or if you are deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, you will have a preliminary inquiry only if you or the prosecutor requests one. How do you elect to be tried?
Marginal note:Election before justice â other indictable offences
(2.1)Â If an accused is before a justice, charged with an indictable offence â other than an offence that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, an offence listed in section 469 that is not punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment or an offence over which a provincial court judge has absolute jurisdiction under section 553 â, the justice shall, after the information has been read to the accused, put the accused to an election in the following words:
You have the option to elect to be tried by a provincial court judge without a jury; or you may elect to be tried by a judge without a jury; or you may elect to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. If you do not elect now, you are deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. How do you elect to be tried?
Marginal note:Procedure where accused elects trial by provincial court judge
(3)Â Where an accused elects to be tried by a provincial court judge, the justice shall endorse on the information a record of the election and shall
(a)Â where the justice is not a provincial court judge, remand the accused to appear and plead to the charge before a provincial court judge having jurisdiction in the territorial division in which the offence is alleged to have been committed; or
(b)Â where the justice is a provincial court judge, call on the accused to plead to the charge and if the accused does not plead guilty, proceed with the trial or fix a time for the trial.
Marginal note:Request for preliminary inquiry
(4)Â If an accused referred to in subsection (2) elects to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or does not elect when put to the election or is deemed under paragraph 565(1)(a) to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, or if an accused is charged with an offence listed in section 469 that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, the justice shall, subject to section 577, on the request of the accused or the prosecutor made at that time or within the period fixed by rules of court made under section 482 or 482.1 or, if there are no such rules, by the justice, hold a preliminary inquiry into the charge.
Marginal note:Endorsement on the information â accused referred to in subsection (2)
(4.1)Â If an accused referred to in subsection (2) elects to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or does not elect when put to the election or is deemed under paragraph 565(1)(a) to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, the justice shall endorse on the information and, if the accused is in custody, on the warrant of remand, a statement showing
(a)Â the nature of the election or deemed election of the accused or that the accused did not elect, as the case may be; and
(b)Â whether the accused or the prosecutor has requested that a preliminary inquiry be held.
Marginal note:Endorsement on the information â other accused charged with an offence punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment
(4.11)Â If an accused is before a justice, charged with an offence listed in section 469 that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, the justice shall endorse on the information and, if the accused is in custody, on the warrant of remand, a statement showing whether the accused or the prosecutor has requested that a preliminary inquiry be held.
Marginal note:Endorsement on the information â accused referred to in subsection (2.1)
(4.12)Â If an accused referred to in subsection (2.1) elects to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or does not elect when put to the election or is deemed under paragraph 565(1)(a) to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, the justice shall endorse on the information and, if the accused is in custody, on the warrant of remand, a statement showing the nature of the election or deemed election of the accused or that the accused did not elect, as the case may be.
Marginal note:Preliminary inquiry if two or more accused
(4.2)Â If two or more persons are jointly charged in an information and one or more of them make a request for a preliminary inquiry under subsection (4), a preliminary inquiry must be held with respect to all of them.
Marginal note:When no request for preliminary inquiry
(4.3)Â If no request for a preliminary inquiry is made under subsection (4), the justice shall fix the date for the trial or the date on which the accused must appear in the trial court to have the date fixed.
Marginal note:Jurisdiction
(5)Â Where a justice before whom a preliminary inquiry is being or is to be held has not commenced to take evidence, any justice having jurisdiction in the province where the offence with which the accused is charged is alleged to have been committed has jurisdiction for the purposes of subsection (4).
- R.S., 1985, c. C-46, s. 536
- R.S., 1985, c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 96
- 2002, c. 13, s. 25
- 2004, c. 12, s. 9
- 2019, c. 25, s. 239
Marginal note:Remand by justice â Nunavut
536.1Â (1)Â If an accused is before a justice of the peace charged with an indictable offence mentioned in section 553, the justice of the peace shall remand the accused to appear before a judge.
Marginal note:Election before judge or justice of the peace in Nunavut â 14 years or more of imprisonment
(2)Â If an accused is before a judge or justice of the peace, charged with an indictable offence that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, other than an offence mentioned in section 469, the judge or justice of the peace shall, after the information has been read to the accused, put the accused to an election in the following words:
You have the option to elect to be tried by a judge without a jury or to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. If you do not elect now, you are deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. If you elect to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or if you are deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, you will have a preliminary inquiry only if you or the prosecutor requests one. How do you elect to be tried?
Marginal note:Election before judge or justice of the peace in Nunavut â other indictable offences
(2.1)Â If an accused is before a judge or justice of the peace, charged with an indictable offence â other than an offence that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, an offence listed in section 469 that is not punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment or an offence mentioned in section 553 â, the judge or justice of the peace shall, after the information has been read to the accused, put the accused to an election in the following words:
You have the option to elect to be tried by a judge without a jury or to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. If you do not elect now, you are deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury. How do you elect to be tried?
Marginal note:Request for preliminary inquiry â Nunavut
(3)Â If an accused referred to in subsection (2) elects to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or does not elect when put to the election or is deemed under paragraph 565(1)(a) to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury or if an accused is charged with an offence listed in section 469 that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, the justice or judge shall, subject to section 577, on the request of the accused or the prosecutor made at that time or within the period fixed by rules of court made under section 482 or 482.1 or, if there are no such rules, by the judge or justice, hold a preliminary inquiry into the charge.
Marginal note:Endorsement on the information â accused referred to in subsection (2)
(4)Â If an accused referred to in subsection (2) elects to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or does not elect when put to the election or is deemed under paragraph 565(1)(a) to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, the justice or judge shall endorse on the information and, if the accused is in custody, on the warrant of remand, a statement showing
(a)Â the nature of the election or deemed election of the accused or that the accused did not elect, as the case may be; and
(b)Â whether the accused or the prosecutor has requested that a preliminary inquiry be held.
Marginal note:Endorsement on the information â other accused charged with an offence punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment
(4.01)Â If an accused is before a judge or justice of the peace, charged with an offence listed in section 469 that is punishable by 14 years or more of imprisonment, the justice or judge shall endorse on the information and, if the accused is in custody, on the warrant of remand, a statement showing whether the accused or the prosecutor has requested that a preliminary inquiry be held.
Marginal note:Endorsement on the information â accused referred to in subsection (2.1)
(4.02)Â If an accused referred to in subsection (2.1) elects to be tried by a judge without a jury or by a court composed of a judge and jury or does not elect when put to the election or is deemed under paragraph 565(1)(a) to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, the justice shall endorse on the information and, if the accused is in custody, on the warrant of remand, a statement showing the nature of the election or deemed election of the accused or that the accused did not elect, as the case may be.
Marginal note:Preliminary inquiry if two or more accused
(4.1)Â If two or more persons are jointly charged in an information and one or more of them make a request for a preliminary inquiry under subsection (3), a preliminary inquiry must be held with respect to all of them.
Marginal note:Procedure if accused elects trial by judge â Nunavut
(4.2)Â If no request for a preliminary inquiry is made under subsection (3),
(a)Â if the accused is before a justice of the peace, the justice of the peace shall remand the accused to appear and plead to the charge before a judge; or
(b)Â if the accused is before a judge, the judge shall
(i)Â if the accused elects to be tried by a judge without a jury, call on the accused to plead to the charge and if the accused does not plead guilty, proceed with the trial or fix a time for the trial, or
(ii)Â if the accused elects or is deemed to have elected to be tried by a court composed of a judge and jury, fix a time for the trial.
Marginal note:Jurisdiction â Nunavut
(5)Â If a justice of the peace before whom a preliminary inquiry is being or is to be held has not commenced to take evidence, any justice of the peace having jurisdiction in Nunavut has jurisdiction for the purpose of subsection (3).
Marginal note:Application to Nunavut
(6)Â This section, and not section 536, applies in respect of criminal proceedings in Nunavut.
- 1999, c. 3, s. 35
- 2002, c. 13, s. 26
- 2004, c. 12, s. 10
- 2019, c. 25, s. 240
Marginal note:Elections and re-elections in writing
536.2Â An election or a re-election by an accused in respect of a mode of trial may be made by submission of a document in writing without the personal appearance of the accused.
- 2002, c. 13, s. 27
Procedures before Preliminary Inquiry
Marginal note:Statement of issues and witnesses
536.3Â If a request for a preliminary inquiry is made, the prosecutor or, if the request was made by the accused, counsel for the accused shall, within the period fixed by rules of court made under section 482 or 482.1 or, if there are no such rules, by the justice, provide the court and the other party with a statement that identifies
(a)Â the issues on which the requesting party wants evidence to be given at the inquiry; and
(b)Â the witnesses that the requesting party wants to hear at the inquiry.
- 2002, c. 13, s. 27
- 2011, c. 16, s. 3(F)
- Date modified: